Australia hosts the G-20 summit this year -- an annual forum where leaders from 20 of the world's major economies discuss global economic issues. The Leaders' Summit is the key event and leaders from nineteen countries and the European Union will this year meet in Brisbane on the 15th and 16th of November. Here is the link for more information:
Interview with Detective Senior Constable Sean Schimizzi (whos mentioned in the attached media release) about a spate of burglaries in Melbournes south eastern suburb of Vermont. Many people of Indian origin seem to be the victims, because expensive Indian jewellery has been stolen, at times upto the value of $50,000. Hes given basic tips + warning in the short interview:
Here is a link if you missed our 'Khabarsaar Lehnde Punjab Di' in last night's program as presented by Masood Mallhi:
The Weapons Act 1990 states: "A Sikh may possess, in a public place, a knife known as a Kirpan to comply with the person's religious faith." In Victoria, the Govenor in Council, under section 8B of the Controls of Weapons Act 1990, exempts from the operation of section 5(1) and section (1A) of the Control of Weapons Act 1990, in relation to kirpans (swords), a person who is of persons set out into the extent specified in i) A Sikh whose religious practices requires the carrying and possession of a kirpan(a specific type of sword); ii) Bringing a kirpan into Victoria, causing a kirpan to be brought into or sent into Victoria; selling or purchasing a kirpan; displaying or advertising a kirpan for sale; possessing, using or carrying a kirpan - for the purposes of the performance of duties associated with religious observance
NSW Police Media Release Man charged over sexual assault of teen - Woolgoolga Detectives have charged two men in connection with the alleged sexual assault of a teenager in Woolgoolga last week. Investigators attached to Coffs/Clarence Local Area Command commenced Strike Force Mediata after two 16-year-old girls and a 15-year-old girl reported being allegedly sexually assaulted by three men at a Woolgoolga address on Thursday 5 February 2015. Following investigations, a 22-year-old man, who allegedly befriended the girls on social media, was arrested about 10.30am yesterday (Monday 9 February 2015) and was taken to Coffs Harbour Police Station. He was subsequently charged with indecent assault and attempted sexual assault without consent. The man was bail refused to appear before Coffs Harbour Local Court today (Tuesday 10 February 2015). Investigators have since been able to identify the other two men involved, who have left the country. Police have also charged a 24-year-old man with being an accessory after the fact. He was granted conditional bail to appear before Coffs Harbour Local Court on Monday 23 February 2015. Coffs/Clarence Crime Manager, Detective Inspector Darren Jameson said the alleged assaults were violent in nature. Our inquiries have identified contact being made with girls via Facebook and we do believe there was some alcohol involved prior to the committing of these offences, Detective Inspector Jameson said. Any young people who feel they are being inappropriately spoken to on social media should contact police. We know for a fact that a number of sexual predators use social media platforms and apps to target and groom children, Detective Inspector Jameson said. If you or someone you know has been approached by someone who is acting inappropriately online, please report the matter to police. Anonymous leads can be given to Coffs Harbour detectives via Crimestoppers on 1800 333 000.
Swamy Army is the widest reaching Indian sports fan club in the world. Swamy Army is committed to providing a unique identity to Indian Cricket fans, while helping them watch and support every game the Indian cricket team plays abroad, starting with Australia. Swamy Army organises cricket tours, match day tickets with priority seating arrangements and merchandising for the fans besides other membership benefits.
