Many Dinka speakers find it difficult to deffertiate between the departments within the Department of Human Service due to a language barrier. This time we decided to contact Abraham Telar Nicknora, a qualified social worker, is one of over one hundred staff based in the Department of Human Services multilingual call centre who helped answer more than 829 000 calls in a language other than English last year. Abraham will be answering many questions in the area of Centrelink, Child Support and Medicare for first time on SBS Dinka Radio. Originally from South Sudan, Abraham speaks Dinka and Sudanese Arabic and knows firsthand what it is like to arrive in a country and learn a new language. Im proud to work in a place where my language and cross-cultural skills are seen as an asset and I can use Dinka to break down language barriers for other people, Abraham said. I love sharing my culture and heritage. I am often called on to provide cultural advice and training to other staff. I go out of my way to make sure everyone, even the most vulnerable, can access Government services and support regardless of their language or background. Harmony Day, this Saturday 21 March, is an ideal time to recognise and celebrate Australias cultural and linguistic diversity. The Department of Human Services has an extensive range of services available for people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, with over 700 bilingual staff, 70 Multicultural Service Officers and just over 40 Indigenous frontline staff who provide cultural and language support to people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds.
It was reported that South Sudan town of Ayod was taken by the opposition forces in Jonglei State but South Sudan army spokesperson Philp Aguer Panyang Jot disputed a claim made by the SPLA in O. He acknowledged that the serious fioght that took place around Ayod on the 25/03/2015 which resulted in loss of 54 people from the oppositions forces according to Philip Aguer.
The views expressed in this piece are solely those of the author whose name appears above. He holds a BA in economics and MA in International Economics and Finance. He can be reached at; The South Sudanese Pound (SSP) came into being in July 2011 when the country attained her independence from Sudan. When the SSP was introduced by the first governor of the Central Bank of South Sudan, Elijah Malok Aleng (May he rest in peace), he made it clear that the country was adopting a managed Float as opposed to pure float or fixed exchange rate regimes. Managed Float regime is when exchange rates fluctuate, but a central bank can influence the exchange rates by buying and selling currencies. The official bank rate against U.S dollar at the time was set at SSPs 2.96/$. More than 3 years later, the official rate has remained the same although the parallel rates in black markets have fluctuated between 3.5 to 7.2 SSP per dollar. In a nutshell, 2.96 has been our official bank rate even when the country almost went into a full scale war with Sudan over Panthou in April 2012. It has been the same when the country accused Sudan of thefts of her oil, forcing South Sudan to shut down pipe lines for more than a year. And 2.96 has been the same when the country found herself in a civil war more than a year ago. With the three major economic shocks highlighted with no policy changes to support our currency, does that really look like a managed float? How come we didnt use the buying and selling of SSPs or other currencies which was the basis of the country adopting a managed float? An exchange rate regime that ignored those major shocks to the economy doesnt fit the bill and it looked more like a fixed exchange rate regime more than anything else.
I am, therefore appealing to the youth of South Sudan to rise up and shoulder their historical responsibility of saving this Country from total collapse. We have been divided on tribal and Regional lines for far too long. The social fabric of our society which forms the basis of our future has been torn, our economy is in total ruin, our diplomatic ties have damaged almost beyond repair, our armed and security forces have been turned on its own people, our sovereignty has been compromised and the Country has lost vision and direction. The status-quo is unsustainable and the Current leadership in the Country is too deformed to be reformed and therefore there is an urgent and pressing need of a total revolutionary overhaul of the system. This responsibility falls squarely on the shoulders of the youth South Sudan. It is my strong belief that the SPLM-IO under the able leadership of Dr. Riek Machar provides the best alternative and the best tool for which we can fix the ills of our Country. At least Dr. Riek Machar has a vision for the future of the Country, whether you agree with that vision or not. From the democratic reform within the SPLM and the Country at large to Federalism and creation of more States to bring services closer to the long suffering people or the badly needed reforms in economic, public service and security sectors.
Did you call the President or his office? Here in South Sudan things are different. When calling; your call will have to be directed to other people in order to facilitate the meeting. I did call his office manager and I also spoke with Minister of Presidential Affairs Awan Guoldit but they always told me that, President is busy and over scheduled. Every time I call; they told me that, President is in a meeting but if he finishes then you will be called back but in vain. And that how we are now and I was hoping to talk to him face to face instead of telephone call. When there was fire in the Northern Bhar el Gazal State; I told (President) him that I wanted to go back home so that I can go and assess the damage but he said that, he heard about the fire but he never replied me to go to the State. There was no need for me to travel there without him telling me to do so and that why I am here waiting to hear what he will tell me. Where is your adviser Yel Deng Nguel? They have thrown him to the deep pit (arrested underground) last night at military barrack here in Juba and they have also arrested the journalist Michael Christopher who is from Agaar who interviewed me on SSTV. What were you accused of? I was accused of embezzlement and they said that. I have wired the money to my son yet the real contracts and how this money was given is a documented process They accused me that, I bought the 25 cars for the State Government without consulting the parliament. They also accused me about the traditional worship which was done at the shrine by my clan people and they said, Why did your clans people gather gathered at their shrine for a first time since you became a Governor? This is something that I dont understand what connect me to that. They were not happy with the new policies that I put out in regard to how Governments money is collected from people. I asked for every transaction to or from to be recorded. Due to the poor harvest; I authorised that no food items tax in order to give citizen space but they were not happy with all these.
Bɛ̈nyë akutë gëlë baai ee jam kenë kɔc ke akutë SBS Dinka Radio në të loië baai rɔt thïn në pɛ̈I ke thiɛ̈r ku ŋuan cë lɔ në ye mɛn. Bɛ̈ny Kuɔl ee jam në ka wën nuan baa ku wɛ̈t cë bë luel ëkë në biände. Ee ya Luel ya, Cë wä wuɔ luit ku miit ye thaar ciɛ̈n eei ka rɛɛi ye ke loi pan Jiɛ̈ŋdɛn kën wär luït apɔth eei. Nhialic ee bɔ̈ ku luit wuɔk ku ye tïŋ ka yuku kek loi gɔ rɔt cuɔ̈tciɛ̈n. Kɔc ajam ya Kuɔl ee rac, ɣɛn rack u ɣɛn lɛ̈të alɔ ayï jö cäk ku cɔl ya cë Kuɔl thuëët.
SPLM G10 member Maj Gen Madut Biar Yel react to President Salva Kiir Mayardit speech especially on accusation labeled at them by the president. Yes we are SPLM historical leaders. We all started this SPLM and name it. We includes him President Kiir, Dr John Garang and all of those who died like Karbino Kunayin, William Nyuon and Arok Thon Arok. We are the historical leaders of SPLM. We dont doubt that he (President Kiir) is a historical leader but he is the one doubting us as historical leaders. So, he said that was wrongly and he offended us at that point.Former Minister of Telecommunication Maj Gen Madut Biar Yel Listen to the program at 6am Sunday-Melbourne time
On SBS Dinka Radio Dr Riek Machar the Chairman of the SPLM/A in Opposition and Commander in Chief react to the speech delivered by South Sudanese President Salva Kiir Mayardit on the 18/03/2015. The speech he made on the 18 is a very disappointing speech to South Sudanese because; what the South Sudanese expected of him is to tell them when peace will come and the hope for peace? What I can remember because I watched from the started to the end, it was all negative that he has refused this, refused that and correctly he refused all those points. Another point he didnt mentioned is that he did refused to compromise on the points he made and all those topics. Meanwhile; I have never said that I need to be a first Vice President or Prime Minister but I need a peace that can be implemented by anybody. South Sudanese former Vice President, Chairman and Commander in Chief of SPLM/A in opposition speaking on SBS Dinka Radio .
Wäraköl ke pɛi ye nïïn thiɛ̈rrou ee bë caal ke Bɛ̈ny thɛɛrë panë Australia Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser cë nyin määr kenë cë tuany në kam ku kën bɛi arëëtic. Jɔn . Malcolm Fraser ee ye run thiɛ̈rbɛ̈t ku ŋuan 84. Malcolm Fraser ee ŋɔ̈ɔ̈r panë Australia në biän akutë Liberal Party gɔl në pɛië thiɛ̈r ku tök ke ye nïïn thiɛ̈r ku tök në runë biänabur tök ku buɔt ke dhoŋuan ku thiɛ̈rdhorou ku dhïc agut cë runë thiɛ̈rbɛ̈t ku diäk. Yen Malcolm Fraser ee dhïïth në Töörak në Victoria ke pɛië dhïc ye nïïn thiɛ̈rrou ku tök në runë biänabur tök ku buɔt ke dhoŋuan ku thiɛ̈rdiäk. na ɣɔn cë jäl në bänyic yic ëë ke bë ya jam në biän yic ke kɔc ŋɔ̈ŋ ku ciɛŋ panë Australia. Jɔn Gɛ̈rɛ̈ŋ Kon ee ye ran töŋë kɔc cë yök ke yen wäär pïïr yen ku kë cë bë luel yenëkë.
Në week wär cë lɔ ke tɔŋ ee bë dhuk thïn në kɛm ke akuut thäär në Junub Thudän në kɛm ke SPLA në akuma yic ku akutë kɔc thäär.Aye athook SPLA luel ye jenny akuma atɔ̈ kë kɔc thäär cuɔ̈pwei në Wadkona ku Wumdhölwïc cë luɛlë wɛ̈t Aguër Panyaŋ. Në biänë tɔŋ ëë ke ye Aguër luel ye jenny akuma yenë cë tɔŋ jäl be jɔt ke ye biän wën kɔr kek ye bë Renk ciɛ̈ ye bɛɛr biök. Jamda wuɔnë Aguer yenëkë
Abɛ̈ny Kucha Tiir atɔ̈ ke ye tiɛŋabar ku ye mane mïïth cë pïïr në guɔ̈mic në ruɔ̈n ke tɔŋë Junup Thudän. Ee bë kök baai ku kuɛny rokic agute cë bë ɣeet pan Abɛ̈c, Kenya ku agut cë pan Amirka ke ye biän wën ye ye kɔr bë wëi ke kuak ku bë mïïth nɔŋ pïïr piɛth në rune riäk. Ee bë lɔ lu në Amirka në akëm kunë töŋë ka cë kek bë tak ëë ke bë akölköl ëë guɔ̈m cen gum juir ku në lɛ̈k kɔc në buŋë cë gɔ̈ɔ̈r ye cɔl Tears oɣ a Mother. Yen ee cë bɛ̈n pane Auɛtralia ku yenë ka cïï wuɔk bë jam wuɔnë yen në SBS Dinka Radio
Ee ca lɛ̈k Riɛ̈k ya kë ɣɔn cë rɔt loi në runë biänbur rou ku rou acë rɔt ber dhuɔ̈k thïn. Ɣɔn cïïn lɔ dhukciɛ̈n kenë yïn cë kan thɔ̈ɔ̈r wenë wuɔk në ruun ke thiɛ̈r ku tök wenë miirï/akuma Thudän ku week ke thäär ke week ye kɔc mɛt tök kek. Yïn cë bë lɔ dhuk ciɛ̈n ke yïn cë agɛmë riɔ̈c thanyic në kamdu wenë akuma Thudän man ye cɔl Agɛmë Kartum(1997). Ye tänŋö cen rɔt kan loi në pinynom ba agɛmë dɔ̈ɔ̈r ya lɔ thanyic ɣonë ran yɔŋ yïn? Aca bë dhiac ke lɛ̈k yen ya ɣɔn le yïn dhuk ciɛ̈n ke Wani ee bë nyaai në nyindeic ku lööm yïn ku tɛ̈uë yïn në thöny de yic.
Days after the UN Security Council passed a sanction which is meant to restrict individuals which will be identify by the selected committee; many youth agencies and other civil societies went out to demonstrate againt the decision made by UN. The Youth for peace and reconciliation in conjunction with South Sudanese Civil society organization organized the rally on 5th March 2015 at Garang mausoleum marching to the parliament. They reacted to the sanctions which many of them see as a sanction to the country which will be a contradiction to the actual document. Many of these youth and civil societies were later joined by politicians including Minister who condemn the passing of the document by the UN Security Council. Deng Dau Malek who is a head of the commission and MP for Twic East Constituency joined them and we were able to reach and ask him about why they went out?
Wär cenë jamë dɔ̈ɔ̈r rɔt nhiac ku cë teer dït arëëtic; go awuut ke akutë SPLM në akuma yic ku akutë kɔc ke SPLM man thäär a akutë kɔc ke SPLM G10 bë rɛɛc ku luelkɛ̈ ye bïk lɔ jam kepɛ̈i. Akutë SPLM G10 ee tɔ̈ ke ye kɔc ɣɔn cë kek mac ku cë kɔc juïc kekek kan ya duŋɔ̈ɔ̈r ke akutë SPLM. Në biänë dɔ̈ɔ̈r ke ye akutkɛ̈ aye ke ye biänë dɔ̈ɔ̈r kedhia agut cë pɛi nïïn dhïc man cenë akutkɛ̈ bë rɛɛc. Në ye biänë ëë ka cuk bë them buk jam wuɔnë Diktor Majak ku bë juiir yeŋö yenë kek rɛɛc?
After struggling with malaria for almost two weeks, I decided to test my fitness by walking from munuki to custom's round about via saint Kizito church. When I reached to custom I decided to eat something but the hygiene of those selling fried fish, bambe, sambusa and groundnut never impress me so, I was left standing calculating my next move. When I look around, one young lady caught my eye! She was beautiful, young and smart! Moreover carrying a baby on her back. Now I have every reason to answer my stomach's demand. I went to her place and immediately I was welcomed politely something that our illiterate women can't do. However I started a conversation about what I want to eat but she advises me to have rest since I am sweating which convince her that I might have been running! Adding that it is not advisable to either drink or eat immediately after exercise. She speaks good English that makes me wonder how a learned girl like her ends up on the street selling some foodstuffs! Anyway I hinted to her advise and sat on a long bench she puts there basically for her customers. The kid on her back was not comfortable hence I ask her to give me the kid meanwhile she is working. The kid might have been unhappy with the situation that when removed he was very happy. Very handsome happy boy! I ask myself! What happened to this young lady whose future is surrounded by suffering. Something that any human being can see.She was pregnated by a man while she was in senior three. She was young and never knew anything about men. She was deceived with gifts and the man who usually comes to her driving V8 promised to marry her in case of anything.
Pɛië Diäk ke ye nïïn dhïc yenë ke bë ya thök jamë dɔ̈ɔ̈r cë luɛlë ku löŋë cïï akutë Igad täu. Ye löŋë ee cë ŋɔ̈th cɔk bɔ̈ në kɔc ke pane Junub Thudän yic cë man adɛ̈ ke dɔ̈ɔ̈r abë dhil thanyic ku bë tɔŋ cɔk kääc kɛɛm ke akut thäär në ye mɛn. Në jamda wuɔnë Dhïïu Mathok ëë ke jam në ka wën ye tïŋ ëë ke cë kek nuan në jamic në kɛmken. Jamda yenë kë.
Daniel Awet Akot is a South Sudanese politician who served the country in various positions including being the former Governor of Lakes State, Minister of Interior and deputy speaker of Parliament. Awet who is a senior SPLM member took part in the recent peace and reunification of the party talks in Arusha. As a senior member in the ruling party; Awet doubted if Abasenjo report will be accepted by the Government because of what he believes as Khartoum influence. He said this in regard to that.. "Obasanjo wrote that report and that report is not good with us. He is not the author but a person connected with Khartoum took part in writing the report. This person used his commonsense by referencing another war atrocities but not focus on the reality of what took place in this war. They interviewed different people and fail to do so with those who knew the genesis of what took place.
"I went to Ethiopia because my husband was killed during the first war in Sudan. And as you know it; if the Lion is killed then lioness will react furiously. I was annoyed that why I have to walked 90 days from Twic in Bhar el gazal to Ethiopia. While in Dimma refugee Camp; I met Atem Nathan Riak who was a medical Doctor. I was trained medical personnel on Nursing and Medical Assistant and armed with experiences. I was ready to help and Atem immediately assigned me to the group where these young boys were. In those groups; there was outbreak of measles, diarrhoea and their feet were infested by a deadly jiggers. Seeing such life; I then decided to move to their vicinity so that I could give them the care they needed as their mother. Victoria Adhar Arop
Atem Yaak Atem is a veteran South Sudanese journalist and former Deputy Minister of information and Broadcasting. Atem spoke of the challenges being face by the young journalists and how many of them failed to follow described codes and ethics of their profession. Atem talk of impartial coverage of current affairs, news and also about the reporting. Here is part two of the interview.
Daniel Diing Anyaai is a South Sudanese musician. He recently toured Australia with some of his colleagues with his new songs. Diing left School to focus on his music career in South Sudan. He was interviewed by Daniel Atem Manyuon while in Juba.
Anyar Anyinhë Kur man nyic ke ye waar arëëtic atɔ̈ ke cë nɔŋ ŋääp ke ye biän ëë cenë riäi ye puk kenë lɔ Nimulë.
Patrick McClure's report suggests simplifying the current 22 payments and 55 supplements to five options. It would deliver a tiered working-age payment, supported-living pension, child-and-youth payment, carer payment and the age pension. Young people would not qualify for welfare payments until they turned 22 years old.
Atem Yaak Atem is a South Sudanese former Deputy Minister of Information and Broadcasting and a veteran journalist for over 40 years now. Atem had served almost all the regional Governments, the liberation movement and recently in the Government of the Republic of South Sudan. Atem have been our regular guest on issues of media and the political situation in South Sudan. I spoke with Atem while was in Sydney on recent news defection within the SPLM in O and the ongoing peace talks. Here the interview
Rebecca Nyadeng de Mabior is the wife of former President of South Sudan and ofrmer Minister in the Government of South Sudan. During the crisis; she was one of those accused to have taken sides during the press conference which she took part of Dec 6 2013. Even if she was not arrested; Rebecca is counted as member of the SPLM G10 and i spoke with her today from Nairobi.
February 20, 2015 (Nairobi)-South Sudanese President Salva Kiir Mayardit met exiled members of the ruling party the group known as G10. This meeting was initiated by President of Kenya Uhuru Kenyatta. President Kiir who attended the East African community was able to meet separately with the members who disagreed with him in 2013. Some of the topics discussed were the recent Arusha Agreement and the 6 points agreed to speed up the peace process. Dr Majak Agot was in that meeting and I spoke with him from Nairobi.
Many of these children were affected by measles, chickenpox, diarrhoea and their feet were badly infested by jiggers. Victoria Adhar Arop was a medical officer trained with Nursing and Medical Assistance Certificates. In interview conducted on SBS Dinka Radio; Victoria Adhar said, I went to Ethiopia because my husband was killed during the first war in Sudan. And as you know it; if the Lion is killed then lioness will react furiously. I was annoyed that why I have to walked 90 days from Twic in Bhar el gazal to Ethiopia. While in Dimma refugee Camp; I met Atem Nathan Riak who was a medical Doctor. I was trained medical personnel on Nursing and Medical Assistant and armed with experiences. I was ready to help and Atem immediately assigned me to the group where these
On release of the three South Sudanese hostages who were taken to Jiech out of their will by the UN helicopter; Duop played a role in releasing them back to Juba and here is what he said about the ordeal. I got the information very quickly because I was very far away from the area at the distance of ten hours. I was in frontline and I order that they should come to where Iam. I want to tell you that human life is valuable, is very valuable despite our tribal lines. When we apprehend those people; we reported to our general head quarter. I think people in Ayod County decided not to kill them because killing three people will not be the end of the war in South Sudan.
In many aspects; South Sudanese womens issues are not easily discuss and this will be a turnaround if women ecomes the writers of their own stories. In their mission state it is stated as, the magazine will contribute to women empowerment, peace building and conflict management by bringing communities together and encouraging exchange of ideas and debate aimed at bringing about truth and reconciliation. It also aims at improving the socio-economic status of war-affected communities through education and health pull-outs, as well as by providing useful information on gender base violence, business, agriculture, fashion, love, beauty, music, art, culture, family matters, environmental issues and general lifestyle.
Dr Samuel defied the odds by studying medicines and now a practicing Medical Doctor. In an emotional story of trekking the bushes of South Sudan; he talks about how he came to Kakuma. Listen to the story on this long interview
In another development; United Nation Mission in South Sudan ordered the Korean contingents who were helping on the construction of Bor-Juba road to stop going ahead with phase two. For asked Mayor of Bor and he had this to say This We have received a letter today that UNMISS (United Nation Mission in South Sudan) in Juba instructed UNMISS (United Nation Mission in South Sudan) in Bor not to go a head with the phase two of Juba-Bor road especially the South Korea contingent who are helping in the construction of Juba-Bor road. The Korea sent us a letter confirming the order and they pointed that Juba didnt provide them with any enough reasons but they were told to terminate the phase two of Juba-Bor road. Bor Town Mayor Nicolas Nhial Majak Nhial
At that moment; they came back to me and threw me into their car. I was taken to the prison where they water boarded me. While in prison; they said, We are going to baptize you for second time and you will see it today. They continued to water board until they realized my clothes were all wet and stick to my body. They then started hitting and beating me up anyhow; many things did happened to me. They moved us from that prison to another military prison because one of them said we were not supposed to be in the first prison.
Aleer thanks those who worked hard for their release and he wish people of South Sudan can start to have dialogue on peace Building. Here is the interview.
For a first time on SBS Dinka Radio Ajak Deng Chiengkou will go one on one with the former President in this part one. Mengistu still lives in exile and still wanted by Ethiopia on human rights abuses during his times. in South Sudan; he is considered a hero. President Mengistu Haile Mariam was an Ethiopian leader who took power from the Ethiopia Emperor Haile Selassie in 70s and went on went on to become the Head of State (Feb 4, 1977-1987) and the first President of Ethiopia (September 11, 1987 to May 21, 1991). Mengistu fled Ethiopia in 1991 after the advancing rebels forces were closing in on Addis Ababa in May of 1991.
Mading has this to say about the incident , During the crisis I was having my opinion on former SPLM officials of G10 especially Dr Majak Agot but during our custody I realised why you have to love your people despite having different opinions. Dr Majak was there for us; he calls almost after every hour just to ask how we are and whether we were being looked after. The Government, SPLM in O and individuals played a roles but Dr Majak was there. In terms of care; we were well fed and soldiers carried our water for the 12 hours journey that we took from Jiech. During the times of our departure to Juba; Governor Duop Lam made for us a great farewell. They slaughtered a goat for us and we ate good meal before our departure to Juba. He also came to the airport to see the plane taking off and we then wave at them. I will not go without saying thanks to the Ayod women because these women did an amazing job to protect us. Few women came to make sure that we were safe. They were Mary, Ayen, Nya(sebit) and others who came around us during the night. They needed to protect us. One of them knew my humanitarian work back in Bor and she told us, if you were born by women then none of you will die here but you will go back as free people. Their heroism did change our perceptions and such appreciation will have to go to them. I am a different Mading now and I know our people love themselves and they need peace. Mading Akueth
Isaiah Chol spoke to us on SBS Dinka Radio and he said this We were looked after by Colonel Gatjang in Jiech before we departed to the location of Governor Gabriel Duop Lam. Due my position; things were little bit complicated because words were manufacturer about a statement which I did said. It was created that I wanted the election done without the Nuer but those were not my words. But colonel Gatjang gave us a cordial and carrying status after our capture immediately informed Duop Lam. He also facilitated my communication with Duop Lam on long range Radio. In that talk; Lam assured me of our security. It was not the case for former White Army soldiers who were not happy to see as safe. Gatjang who is a professional soldier told there is nothing we can achieve in killing of three individuals. After Lt Colonel Gatjang realised the situation was tense as he feared that members of the White Army may be a threat to us over night; he then ordered his wife to stay with us in a very small thatch roof house. His wife was afraid and wanted to leave us but Gatjang reacted by beating his wife and forced her to stay with us. He feared someone may kill us during the night but seeing his wife could have forced any assailant away. Isaiah Chol Aruei (Chol Amot)
Daniel: You as Jieng Council Elders met President Kiir because he qualifies to be a member of the council due to his background, what did you told him about the future of this country? Justice Riiny: Well; we supported the President right from day one when he advocated peaceful resolution of the conflict. You will recall as early as Dec 2013; submits were held and he advocated for peaceful resolutions. He has been moving in the last one year and there is nowhere he has not gone to advocating for peace. Peace would have comes long time ago if that was up to President Kiir without Riek demands. There are two reasons that prevented peace. Sometimes I blame the President for decisions that he had made in good faith he allowed the Nuer militia that came from the North. He integrates them to the army so much, so that that allows the Nuer present in the army overwhelming to 65%, 70 percent. This is what went into the mind of Riek that he can overrun Juba within two hours.
For a first time on SBS Dinka Radio Ajak Deng Chiengkou will go one on one with the former President in this part one. Mengistu still lives in exile and still wanted by Ethiopia on human rights abuses during his times. in South Sudan; he is considered a hero. President Mengistu Haile Mariam was an Ethiopian leader who took power from the Ethiopia Emperor Haile Selassie in 70s and went on went on to become the Head of State (Feburary 4, 1977-1987) and the first President of Ethiopia (September 11, 1987 to May 21, 1991). Mengistu fled Ethiopia in 1991 after the advancing rebels forces were closing in on Addis Ababa in May of 1991.
I started my School in Panyangor until class three then I moved to Kakuma in 2008. While at Bhar el naam Primary; I realised that I was excelling in most subjects and that when I applied to Angelina Jolie Primary School which managed by UN with no fees to pay. I knew I have no choice but to work hard in order to change my life and that of a community. I need to be a surgeon if I were to go into proper studies. I need to go to Alliance Girls Secondary School but until now no any sponsorship or Scholarship secured. I will wait until help any comes my way.
Such practices created a big misunderstanding and gave people a base of having any opinion at every level. This is in regard to how military cadres, police and civil servant play greater role in real politics despite a ban on them. This robust debate will give you the glimpse of the challenges around good and bad politics. Here is the interview.
Dr Dhieu also spoke about what triggered form Director of South Sudanese National Television (SSTV) to them. We also tried here at SBS Dinka to reach Khamis Abdel-Latif but he declined the interview by saying, I prohibited myself not to talk to any media at the moment. Meanwhile his story was narrated in this quote by Dr Dhieu Mathok. Khamis Abdel-Latif left not because of his argument with Minister but because of the horrors that he saw when his son Moses was arrested by the national security recently. While at his home; Khamis saw his son Moses who works at Juba Airport being chase by the National Security car toward home where they caught him. Khamis asked them why chasing the boy but they declined to talk but told him that we are arresting him. Khamis then decided accompany his son on the same car with the security forces and they were driven to Jebel. While at Jebel; Khamis saw people being torture there in small huts scattered around. There; Khamis heard the voices of crying men and in short period one of the men was taken out as dead body. In other rooms many people were crying in pain. After Khamis saw all these; he then declared that if this is how this Government does things then I will not stay here anymore and that is what brought Khamis Abdel-Latif to SPLM in O. Narrated by Dr Dhieu Mathok
We were aware of this letter and the process of investigation was ongoing but from that moment we knew that these women were pushed by someone. We were aware that some officials in the Ministry of Finance were not happy with their new positions and that prompted a new concerns by influencing others to act on their behalf against the Government. These triggered the arrest and the four leading women who were aware of the conspiracy were arrested. This is a norm and practice in Law enforcement and it will be up to the court to release them if they are fought not guilty. As from yesterday; we have now arrested four and one woman among the leading five is still being located. This was even supported by former Governor who is a current South Sudan Minister of Defense H.E Kuol Manyang. He was here yesterday and he supported the arrest because these women were after something but not a normal citizens demonstration which always follow legal ways. Peter Wal Athiu Madol Minister of Local Government and Law Enforcement-Jonglei State.
Mabior Garang de Mabior is the official spokesperson SPLM in O and he explains the position of the group and how they participated on the whole process. Mabior spoke with Ajak Deng from Nairobi after he returned from Tanzania. He explains the extend of the agreement between the SPLM factions.The leaders of South Sudan's warring factions have agreed to a political deal that could help to end to a 13-month-old civil war. But supporters of the different factions are warning there's still a long way to go to achieve a settlement that will end fighting that has already cost tens-of-thousands of lives. The deal has been signed in Tanzania between rival factions of the ruling Sudanese People Liberation Movement, the SPLM, which led the country to independence from Sudan in 2011.
Maj. Gen. Madut Biar Yel is a member of the G10 and a member of delegation that travelled to Tanzania for the intraparty talks. He explains the extend of the agreement between the SPLM factions.The leaders of South Sudan's warring factions have agreed to a political deal that could help to end to a 13-month-old civil war. But supporters of the different factions are warning there's still a long way to go to achieve a settlement that will end fighting that has already cost tens-of-thousands of lives. The deal has been signed in Tanzania between rival factions of the ruling Sudanese People Liberation Movement, the SPLM, which led the country to independence from Sudan in 2011.
The recent agreement between the SPLM factions brought different reaction from various members of the South Sudanese community across the globe. One of the few people who gave his reaction is Kuir ë Kuir who is currently in Canada. Kuir is an author and political commentator and here is his interview. Under the deal signed in Tanzania, representatives of the different SPLM factions have agreed to try to reunite the party.
In 2013; she went to South Sudan for a first time in her life but things were not as originally planned. She arrived in Juba on the 09/12/2013 and the war broke out few days later on 15/12/2013. She was safe but the experiences were different to what she is used to in Europe. She later went back to London safe but continues to push for change through Talk of Juba and her social media pages. Recently she came to Australia for a first time to visit her relatives. We invited her to SBS Dinka Radio where she shared her experiences. Here is the interview.
Në Juba ke wɛ̈t akuma Amirka acïï Ambassador Charles Twining lɛ̈k bɛ̈ny ëë ka bëyic man ye Dr Marial Benjamin Bil cë man adɛ̈ ke Akuma de Amirka acë bë kony në kɔ̈ɔ̈c ku kuëny bääny cë caal ke bë rɔt loi në pɛië dhetem ke ye nïïn thiɛ̈rdiäk cë ciɛl cenë ye caal në akutë juɛ̈rë kɔ̈ɔ̈c ku kuënyë bääny. Në kë cë luel ke yen ye adiɛr bë kek ciɛ̈ cɔk kony yen Ambäthada ëë ke jamë dɔ̈ɔ̈r yenë loi rɔt në ye mɛn ku ka cen bë jam ku luel. Yekënë acenë wuɔk Dïktor Jök Madut Jök bë thïïc ke ye rantöŋ nɔŋ ka nyic kek në luɔi cït yekënë. Jök ee jam ke tɔ̈ në Amirka.
Në Juba ke wɛ̈t akuma Amirka acïï Ambassador Charles Twining lɛ̈k bɛ̈ny ëë ka bëyic man ye Dr Marial Benjamin Bil cë man adɛ̈ ke Akuma de Amirka acë bë kony në kɔ̈ɔ̈c ku kuëny bääny cë caal ke bë rɔt loi në pɛië dhetem ke ye nïïn thiɛ̈rdiäk cë ciɛl cenë ye caal në akutë juɛ̈rë kɔ̈ɔ̈c ku kuënyë bääny. Në kë cë luel ke yen ye adiɛr bë kek ciɛ̈ cɔk kony yen Ambäthada ëë ke jamë dɔ̈ɔ̈r yenë loi rɔt në ye mɛn ku ka cen bë jam ku luel. Yekënë acenë wuɔk Dïktor Jök Madut Jök bë thïïc ke ye rantöŋ nɔŋ ka nyic kek në luɔi cït yekënë. Jök ee jam ke tɔ̈ në Amirka.
Jan 17, 2015- Latest reports from South Sudans Upper Nile are says that fighting resumes between the Government forces and the opposition forces in Omthelawich and Renk. Both parties contradicted each other on who controlled Omthelawich after the attack. The fight was reported to be heavy and both parties got casualties. In an interview with SPLA spokesperson Philip Aguer Panyang who stated that Our forces dislodged the rebel forces led by Koang Chol is now on run after they were forced out.
In recent days; political tensions are rising in South Sudanese State of Northern Bhar el Gazal where the former Governor who was appointed as Chief of General still maintain the chairmanship of the ruling party in the State. A caretaker Governoer who is now leading the State is being sideline when it comes to political activities and decision making in his Government. Former Governor General Malong Awan Anei is still taking political decision despite being an army senior official. In South Sudan; military officers or soldier are baned from taking direct political decisions but general Malong case seems to be unique. In an interview with Governor Kuel Aguer Kuel, he has this to say.
In October; we broadcasted an interview about the demolition of Cush International Church in Juba South Sudan. The causes of demolition were contradicted by the parties involved then and now. The location were the Church was located was given to the army by the Central Equatroia according to a senior military officer who confidently told us about the issue but that notion is disputed by the members of the Church. Abraham Chol Maken who is known as Prophet Abraham is the head of the Church and he accused authorities for prosecuting despite religious freedom in the country. These accusations include scenes that they claimed to have documented during the arrest of Abraham. The Churchs members claim to have legitimate reasons of building a Church there even though evidence of land ownership cannot be produced. On the SPLA side; Abraham story was categorically rejected by one of the former seniors officials with the clear knowledge of the case but his names withheld because he was not authorised said this, Abraham Chol and his group were warned in the past about the use of that open space which is allocated to the army for recreational purposes but they refused and went ahead with building without licence to do so. These are the reason that led to the demolition of the Church but not a religious prosecution. In history of the country; destruction of Churches or any religious structure was one a case used by South Sudanese especially the current ruling party to rally Evangelical leaders in America and other western countries. This was due to suppression of religious rights that was practiced by the Khartoum regime against South Sudanese Christians and Animists in the South. This turn around made by the military Chief of General Staff if the reports are correct will be a total contradiction to the religious tolerance and freedom as enshrined in various legal documents that are used in South Sudan.
Aye Bɛ̈ny Nyandeng Malek Deliech aci jaam alɔ̈ŋ kak joor bääny den yic ku jɔl ɣa thiɛ̈ɛ̈k yic ci yiëk yen bi kuäny tuëŋ ke ye tïk alɔŋ Junup Sudan ee bääny Warrap yic. luel lɔn nada Diäär aye gua piöc maac kɔc ke koor jɔk thook baai pɛ̈nden dhiët kek thïïn. Jɔk määc tɛ ye tɛɛk miëth tɛn kɔc baai bi jäl ɣet aɣer tɛn kɔc kɔ̈k ku kenë ɣe keek nyuöth cɛ̈ɛ̈ŋ ku määc käŋ. Aci bɛn mät thiin aya lɔn nada bi diaar ke cin ya nyuɔ̈th nhiäl ke luel lɔn wïc kek bääny ku jɔl kek kuäny bääny. Aci luel aya lɔn nada raan aci leu ku bi mɛ̈ɛ̈c erot ku ke rot leu rin kuöny kɔc thiɔ̈k këk yen.
Jaamden yic aye luel lɔn nada cuɛ̈t këne ee ke ci looi bïk kɔc rot dɔɔk baany yic ku gëël kek wei. Kua ye luel lɔn cuɛt aci bi lɔ cök erin tɔ riɔ̈c thin erin ɣɔ̈n kɔk aleŋ yiic toŋ kua ci thɔ̈ɔ̈ŋ ke cuɛt 2010.
Aye General Dau Aturjong luel lɔn nada cuɛ̈t bi kɔc cuɛt aci bi lɔ cok erin ŋo baai aleŋ yic tɔŋ ku apɛth bi ya dɔɔr ye kɔŋ thääny ku bi cuɛt jal bɛn. Yen aye luel aya lɔn nada ka wïc "bi ya akuma kɔc kua cie kënë kɔc wen leŋ kä wic ke kua määth".
Aci athook bɛ̈ny luel lɔn nada cuɛ̈t ee ke tɔu löŋ tɛ gat yen thin lɔŋ mɛ̈ɛ̈c kɔc rot thin kua awic ku bi dhiɛl buɔ̈th yic. Ku na leŋ raan ye luel ka cï tɔu loŋ yic ka wic bi tiŋ tɛn bɛ̈ɛ̈i kɔk ci yen kaŋ looi erin acie Junup Sudan yen tueŋ bi yen jal looi.
Yen raan rɛɛl nyin akuma Aci jaam wɛ̈t loiloi South Sudan embassy alɔŋ Nairobi looi tɛn kɔc ye kë luöi. Yen aya aci jaam kawen jöör keek bïk loiloi kä luöi tɛn kɔc Junup kek ciëŋ thin ku kɔc lɔ neem thin. Kajöör ke aye mat thiin agut beer piny passport, yiökyiök Visa ku kuɔ̈ny yen ke gaam wïc.
Aci Professor Abednego kuäny yic nada na cɔ̈k ɣa lɔ̈ɔ̈n tɔu tɔŋ ka cuɛ̈t aŋuɔt looi kua aci thööŋ kenë Syria yen leŋ yic tɔŋ ku cuɛ̈t aci looi thin. Aci maat thin lɔn nada riɛ̈l ci yiëk akuma awïc ku bi bɛn yiëk kek erin ci kaamden thiɔ̈k ku bi thöök. Aluel aya lɔn nada bɛ̈ɛ̈i juëc kɔ̈k aci cuɛt käŋ looi ku acin kuɛ̈ɛ̈n ku Junup aci looi.
Raan thɛ̈ɛ̈r bɛny wɛ̈ɛ̈t kua ci bɛn kuäny ke ye raan rɛɛl nyin (ambassador) Akuma South Sudan alɔŋ Russia,Telar Ring Takpiny Deng. Yen aya aci jaam kajuëc looiden ci luɔ̈i akuma mɛ̈ɛ̈c kene yic ku kakkä keek thɛɛr ci luɔ̈i bïï baai bei yic.
Aci DR Dhieu luel lɔn cï kek jam kua aci mɛt wɛ̈t tɛ bi kek dɔ̈ɔ̈r lɔ thiääny yic thin alɔŋ Ethiopia tɛ dhuk kek thiin. Aci luel lɔn nada kek aci mɛ̈ɛ̈t bi jiɛ̈cden ku jëëc akuma cie mɛt tɛ thɛ̈ɛ̈ny dɔ̈ɔ̈r kua bi reel ke ci tek thook gut tɛ bi pɛi thiaardiak agut bï bɛ̈ny yam kuany.
Col Phillip Aguer, aye luel lɔn rin cïn kek riɛ̈l ku ke kedɛŋ yen ci keek näŋ kä cïk thiääny yiic yen ci kek ye wïc bïk keek dhöŋ kɔ̈ɔ̈th. Kua cie wɛ̈t cï tɔ̈ŋ ke dhäl yen pɛ̈l kek akut jëëc ci kɛ̈ɛ̈c wei ke cïk coop wei ɣɔ̈n keek reel kek thiin yiic.
Benjamin Tong Akol reporting and sharing his person thoughts on the events protest and comment on event torture report.
In this interview Dr Garang Majok Dut, share his childhood dream and how he became successful in his studies and career as the Doctor of Medicine. .
Interview with Care taking Governor Kuel Aguer Kuel on recent reshuffling of the Government of Northern Bhar el Gazal.
The Interview will touch base on the challenges and impacts on the local businesses in South Sudan.
In various Dinka sections; courtship and how young men meet their potential wives can be both lengthy and controversial sometimes when it is compared to other cultures. Various sections have their own ways that are influenced by custom and taboos. In rural villages and cattle camps; areas of festivities that include traditional marriages, dances, rituals and wrestling can the flash points of seeing each. Girls and men may be from different blood line/lineage or clans and that will attract many young men to go far in order to attend long distances festivals just have a chance of meeting one to approach for dating.
Last week South Sudanese civil society leader Deng Athuai gave a powerful message that challenged both South Sudanese leaders both in opposition and the Government to prioritize peace. Deng also challenged both leaders on the absence of their own children in the current war a message that irritated the President Kiir Mayrdit to respond to Deng. Soon after the speech; President Kiirs supporters rally to denounce Deng as Chairmen for the civili society and also demanded apology for having asked both leaders to either work like Mandela or Gadhafi, This is our nation and we will not turn away from here. We need peace now and if the party is not able to do that he should choose one of two - either for this party to be like what Mandela did in South Africa or can be like Gaddafi.
In an interview with Madut Biar Yel who is MP, former Minister and member of a delegation of G10 explained the exchange between Pagan Amum and the President of South Sudan H.E Salva Kiir. Below is the interview.
In an interview with Deng Dau Deng Malek who is MP and member of a delegation to the talk reiterated President Kiir Mayardit calls for peace. Below is the interview.
Ɣɔ̈k ë ke ye Jiɛ̈ŋ ke thïïk thɛɛr ake ye kek lööm në ɣɔ̈k tɔ̈ ke raan yenë thïïk. Kunë ka juïc ke pïïr ee ye thɔ̈ɔ̈ŋ nëŋö; mony yenë thïïk ka nyan thiak abë bɛɛr lɔ ɣap ku bïï panden bɛr keer në ɣɔ̈k ë ke cë kek waan në kölë thïïk. Në ruɔ̈n wäär cenë kɔc ke lɔ në bɛ̈i ke pinynom; ke thïïk ee rɔt waar në wɛ̈ɛ̈r wën cenë ran niɔp liu ku pïïrë kɔc thiak röth ace bɛɛr tääu në jamic. Në ye mɛn; ke mëën ku tïïp yenë ke tääu tueŋ awɛ̈r pïïr ku ka yenë wuɔk ye wëlkɛ̈ thïïc
Recently President Kiir Mayardit met with Riek Machar in Ethiopia in order to reaffirm their commitment to the talk even though violations of the cessation of hostilities continue to paralyse the talk that is expected to bring back peace to South Sudan. Both parties continue too to trade accusations especially on recent attacks in Bentiu where the Government said the opposition forces attacked them before they return the fire. Such violations are still being seen but the international community and the regional bodies continue to demand more from the two warring parties.
Dinka community is a combination of various groups and sections scattered across regions of South Sudan and many of these sections do have distinguishable tune in their dialects. The Dinka people do know themselves as Jiɛ̈ŋ or Muɔnyjiɛ̈ŋ and they are grouped as Nilotics in relation to other tribes of South Sudan. For thousands of years; the histories of various Dinka groups have been told generations after generation orally. When Sudan was canonised by Turks, Egyptian and Britain; the history reality or links were cut off because mass movement became part of the daily life. Dinka is the largest tribe of South Sudan with various sections now living in 7 States out of the ten States in South Sudan and the population is estimated at about 3millions people.
Wäär miädur në yom jima në thaa thiɛ̈r ku biän de ke tiɛr ëë jiɛ̈l në Juba ke nɔŋ ka ëë ke leer kek Panyagor në Twïc County ee bë löny ku nɛ̈k kɔc kerou ëë ke kuath ye. Ye tiɛrë ee tɔ̈ ke nɔŋ yic kɔc ke diäk kuke jur akutë Lutheran World Federation ke nɔŋ apɛ̈c ëë ke leer kek Panyagor në jälde në Juba. Rantöŋ cïï pïïr ee bë riɛŋ panakëm ku yenë ke ye raan dööke luɔ̈ŋ në tiɛric. Pïïrde ku ɣään töök tɔ̈ në ye guɔ̈p akënë kek jäl luel.
In South Sudan; one of the former lostboys of Sudan was appointed last month as Minister of Education in Northern Bhar el Gazal State. Valentino Achak Deng was one of the young South Sudanese unaccompanied minors who left their homes in mid 80s to Ethiopia, Kenya and later to United States. Achak Deng who is native of Aweil left his home as result of the various attacks from the Arab militia known as Marahaleen which brutalised civilians those the Dinka villages and kidnapped many children.
Interview with Dr Kuorwel Kuai Kuorwel who recently started his research on Thɔ̈u a native wild fruit that is found in some of tropical regions in Africa also known as (Heglig) tree in Arabic. In his laboratory work; Dr Kuorwel Kuai Kuorwel is trying to identify and determine the nutrients that are in this popularly fruit in South/Sudanese community. Many of the users import this fruit from South Sudan for consumption here in Australia.
Tëlei eei! Tëlei oou! Tëlei aköl, tëlei aköl, tëlei wakɔ̈u tëlei. Ya rïŋ cɔk ku nɔŋ rïŋ de ayɔm awä të lei.Unknown Maany ee gɛ̈ɛ̈r Ajak Deŋ Ciɛŋkɔ̈u Ɣɛn ee ye biök ëë thöö(k) ku yä lɔ biök ëë ɣɔ̈k, Ku ya lɔ kuanyë tiim ku ya lɔ dhuïnyë rec ɣɛn ee ye dhuŋthin baai ku kuɔ̈I kök län yen dɛ bä nyaai?....
Wäär ke pɛië thiɛ̈r ye nïïn thiɛ̈rrou ku dhoŋuan ke jenyë kɔc thäär man ye rɔt SPLA-IO ee cë pane Rupkonï ku Bentïu yɔ̈tic në tɔ cë bë thɔ̈ɔ̈r në thɛɛk juïc arëëtic në kaam jenny akuma ku kek. Në biänden ëë ka yïikï caal ee ke dhiac në Bentiu cë luɛlë Lul Ruai man yenë tɔ̈ ke ye athookë jenny thäär ku në biän jenny akuma man ye SPLA keka ye Philip Aguër Panyang luel ye wuɔk ka tɔ̈ në Bentïu ku jenyden de kɔc thäär ke wuɔk acuk cop ku wɛt cïï Aguër bë luel yenë kë. Aŋot ke wuɔk dhiac në kake Jenyë Junup Thudän, ke bɛ̈nyë Jec General Malöŋ Awan Anɛ̈I ee tuac ku ke laar në ɣään benë akëëm ke yen lɔr caar kuka cë Aguer be luel yelɛ̈.
Wäär cenë bɛ̈ny thɛɛrë bɛŋë Junup Thudän Elijah Malok Alɛŋ cen nyin maar; ke kɔc juïc cë kan rëër ku cïk lui kenë yen abë jam në pïïrë Elijah ku jɔl ya ka cë kek loi në pïïrde yic. Ran töŋ ëë ye kɔckɛ̈ ee Atëm Garang de Deng de Kuek. Në wëlke yic ëë ke dhïnë piɔ̈u në biän ëë kë cë rɔt loi në jäl Elijah Malok.
Bɛ̈ny thɛɛr yenë ŋäär bɛ̈ŋë Junup Thudän ku yenë ye raan tueŋ në akölkölë Panë Junub Thudän bë wëu jäl thanyic ëë ke ye wëu ke pan lääunom Elijah Malok Alɛŋ ëë Mayen ee nyin määr wäär ke pɛi ye nïïn thiɛ̈rdiäk pɛië thiɛ̈r në rune biänabur rou ku thiɛ̈r ku ŋuan. Elijah ee cë tääc në akëëm në Nairobi ku ke nɔŋ nïïn ke thiɛ̈r në akëëm ke tiitë piny agut cë të ben jäl jääl wäär ku kuatde agut cë mïïthke ake tɔ̈ në thaa wäär loi yen rɔt. Elijah ee duŋɔ̈ɔ̈r, wunë mïïth money pande ku ye wëlen kɔc juïc ku yekenë acenë Atëm Gɛ̈rɛ̈ŋë Deŋ de Kuek man tɔ̈ në Juba ye wɛ̈të bë luel
Dr Majak Agot Atem is a South Sudanese former Deputy Minister for Defence and one of the few politicians who were arrested during the December crisis and accused of taking part in engineering the alleged coup attempt as per the Governments narratives of the time. He and some of his colleagues were arrested on charges that none of them was convicted of and they were all acquitted later and handed over to the Kenyan President Uhuru. They were later invited by IGAD to take part in peace talks in Ethiopia.
In recent weeks; South Sudanese leaders from the countrys ruling party which split in Dec 2013 have been looking for ways to unite their ranks despite ongoing war between SPLM which is currently being led by President Kiir Mayardit, another faction which is fighting the Government known as SPLM in Opposition and the former detainees many of whom are known as G11. The three factions were invited by the leaders of the Tanzanian ruling party CCM in order to unite them ahead of the peace talk or in case peace returns to the country.
In recent weeks; South Sudanese leaders from the countrys ruling party which split in Dec 2013 have been looking for ways to unite their ranks despite ongoing war between SPLM which is currently being led by President Kiir Mayardit, another faction which is fighting the Government known as SPLM in Opposition and the former detainees many of whom are known as G11. The three factions were invited by the leaders of the Tanzanian ruling party CCM in order to unite them ahead of the peace talk or in case peace returns to the country.
Dr Majak Agot Atem is a South Sudanese former Deputy Minister for Defence and one of the few politicians who were arrested during the December crisis and accused of taking part in engineering the alleged coup attempt as per the Governments narratives of the time. He and some of his colleagues were arrested on charges that none of them was convicted of and they were all acquitted later and handed over to the Kenyan President Uhuru. They were later invited by IGAD to take part in peace talks in Ethiopia.
